---
output:
  pdf_document: default
  html_document: default
---
# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. I created the database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 

## Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, you will need to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

In this project, I utilised my data modeling skills to model a data warehouse on Postgres. This data warehouse has 1 fact table i.e. Songplays and 4 dimnesion tables, which are Users, Songs, Artists, and Time. I also developed ETL pipeline using Python and SQL to autmate the entire process of loading the dataset. 

## Project Datasets

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. 

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. 

## Database Schema

### Fact Table
songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
Cloumns: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
Users - users in the app
Columns: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

Songs - songs in music database
Columns: song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

Artists - artists in music database
Columns: artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

Time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
Columns: start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Instructions for running locally

1. Install Postgres
    This is important as the datbase can then be set up and used later for new analytical queries
    
    
2. Run.ipynb
    This file basically has 3 commands. 
    
    The first command to the run the "create_tables.py" file. This file creates all the dimension and fact tables for the data warehouse.
    
    The second command is to run the "test.ipynb" file. This files checked if all the tables were created properly. This file basically has the select queries for checking the tabels.
    
    The 3rd command is to run the ETL pipeline, which will extract all the data from the JSON files(Songs and Log), process the data to fit the analytical needs, and load the data in the postgres data warehouse.  

## Files

1. Create_tables.py
    create_tables.py drops and creates tables both fact and dimension for the data warehouse. Run this file to reset tables before each time the ETL scripts are executed.
    
2. Etl.ipynb
    etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

3. ETL.py
    etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into tables.

4. Run.ipynb
    The python script that automates the ETL process from table creation to data transformation and loading.

5. Sql_queries.py
    sql_queries.py contains all  sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

6. Test.ipynb
    test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table to let check the database.

7. README.md
    README.md provides discussion on your project.

